Have you ever felt really full after a meal and noticed your tummy looked rounder? That's called bloating.1 It can be caused by eating foods that cause excess gas or swallowing too much air. It's a pretty uncomfortable feeling, so you probably want to find ways to avoid it or alleviate it altogether.

Feeling bloated is one of the most common gastro complaints reported to healthcare providers.2 The good news is that you can often find relief from bloating by making small changes to your eating habits. Simple things like chewing less gum or replacing sparkling water with flat water can make a difference. Let's explore some common causes of bloating and how you can fix them.

What Is Bloating?
Bloating is when your belly feels swollen, tight, and full.3 This uncomfortable feeling can come with cramps and pain, as well as flatulence. When bloating is caused by a build-up of gas in the intestines, several things can be at the root of the problem, including:1

Overeating
Eating too quickly
Consuming gas-causing foods, such as beans and cabbage
Swallowing excess air
Having constipation
Experiencing food intolerances
Having irritable bowel syndrome
Experiencing premenstrual syndrome
Fortunately, making small changes to your lifestyle or your eating habits may provide relief from bloating. Here are some reasons why you may feel bloated and how you can fix the problems.

Gassy on a Plant-Based Diet? That May Be a Good Sign
You Ate Too Much
Sometimes, eating too much food can cause bloating.4 It may happen because your digestive system feels overly full or because it's producing gas as the food gets digested. The gas builds up in your gut and makes your belly feel full and distended.

How to Fix It
Eat smaller portions. Practice mindful eating techniques when you feel hungry. Then, stop when you feel comfortably full, not stuffed.5 Note that you may not experience fullness right away, so it's important to eat slowly and take breaks while you're eating to give your body time to signal that feeling of fullness.

You Ate Gas-Causing Foods
Excess gas can be produced when you eat certain foods. Here are some foods known to cause bloating:4

Chickpeas
Lentils
Beans
Brussels sprouts
Cabbage
Cauliflower
These foods contain non-digestible carbohydrates that ferment in the colon and create excess gas, which leads to bloating.6 Case in point: The gut normally contains less than 200 milliliters of gas but increases to 600-700 milliliters after eating a meal with a little less than 1 cup of beans.7
Merch Manual. Gas-related symptoms.



How to Fix It
Keep a journal of the foods you eat and the associated symptoms. Look for patterns to see which foods align with your bloating symptoms. Once you identify the culprit, you can eat less (or none) of that food. You can also take digestive enzymes that help break down the non-digestible carbohydrates and reduce gas and bloating.

You Ate Too Quickly
Consuming food rapidly may cause you to swallow excess air, which leads to gas and bloating. Eating quickly may also lead to overeating, which makes you feel even more full and bloated. Finally, eating rapidly may mean you are not adequately chewing your food. This makes food more difficult to break down and digest, which leads to bloating.

How to Fix It
Slow down and enjoy every bite. Eat without distractions (like screens), and chew slowly. Also, be mindful of what you're eating and notice the texture, spiciness, and flavors.

You Swallowed Excess Air
You may feel bloated from swallowing excess air. This can happen while smoking, chewing gum, eating hard candies, or drinking from a straw.8

How to Fix It
If you are a habitual smoker, take steps to quit. If you find that chewing gum or sucking on mints causes bloating, cut back on these and try a breath spray instead. And, if you get bloated after drinking from a straw, drink straight from a cup or from the spout of a water bottle.

You Drank Carbonated Beverages
Sparkling water, soda, and other fizzy drinks can introduce excess gas into the gut and cause bloating.9 The fizziness in these drinks comes from carbon dioxide, which is a gas. It adds to the gas already in the gut, resulting in bloating and distention (and belching in some people).

How to Fix It
Choose flat water instead of sparkling water. Skip carbonated soda in favor of drinks that don't have bubbly fizz. If you find flat water boring, you can try adding a flavoring to it.

You Are Constipated
Constipation occurs when you have difficulty passing stools, have hard stools, or have infrequent bowel movements.10 There is also a link between constipation and feeling bloated. If your stool does not pass easily, it stays in the colon, where bacteria has more time to ferment. That fermentation leads to more gas, which causes bloating.11

How to Fix It
Take steps to prevent constipation. This may include eating more high-fiber foods, drinking more fluids, or taking medication or supplements (like fiber supplements) to ease bowel movements.10 Work with your healthcare provider to make a plan.

You Have a Food Intolerance
There are a handful of carbohydrates that some people (not everyone!) find hard to digest.12 These are known as FODMAPs, or fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols.13 When these are not digested, they ferment in the colon and cause bloating. Examples of FODMAPs include:13

Lactose: This is a type of sugar found in milk and other dairy products, such as soft cheese and ice cream.
Fructose: This fruit sugar is found in apples, pears, mangoes, cherries, and other fruits.
Fructans: This substance is found in wheat and vegetables, such as onion, garlic, and leeks.
Sugar alcohols: These sugar substitutes include sorbitol, mannitol, and xylitol.
How to Fix It
Work with a dietitian to determine which foods may be causing your gas and bloating. They can help you try a low FODMAP diet, which involves removing and reintroducing foods to isolate the culprits.

You Have Irritable Bowel Syndrome
One common symptom of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is bloating. In fact, while up to 31% of people may feel bloated, about 66% to 90% of people with IBS report feeling bloated.2

How to Fix It
Work with a dietitian on the FODMAP diet to identify which foods cause you to bloat.13 Studies show that removing the problematic FODMAPs can help ease IBS symptoms, including bloating, in about 86% of people.14

You can also consider taking probiotic supplements. Studies have shown that people with IBS who take probiotics (specifically L. sporogens and Bacillus coagulans)  have less bloating.2 However, the American Gastroenterological Association says that probiotics should not be used to treat bloating or distention independently because there is insufficient research to support it.12 Talk to your healthcare provider for personalized advice.

You Have Menstrual Bloating
Having your menstrual period or pre-menstrual syndrome (PMS) can make you feel bloated.15 This feeling may be due to retaining water because of menstrual hormone fluctuations.

How to Fix It
This issue tends to be cyclic and in line with your menstrual cycle. It will ease as your cycle abates, but may come back the following month. For relief, physical activity may help.15 In some cases, PMS medication may help too. Work with your healthcare provider for a plan if bloating every month is causing you issues.

Medical Reasons for Bloating
If changing your food intake or quitting gum and soda aren't helping, talk to your healthcare provider. There are many medical reasons that may cause bloating, which should be investigated if your symptoms persist. Some medical causes of bloating include:126

Gastroparesis
Celiac disease
Heartburn or reflux
Ovarian cancer
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO)
Pancreatic insufficiency
Bowel obstruction
Ascites
Pelvic floor disorder
Work with your healthcare provider if you have ongoing bloating or if it is coupled with abdominal pain, bloody stools, diarrhea, weight loss, or vomiting.1

Bottom Line
Many factors can influence how bloated you feel. Identifying the core cause of bloating is the first step in finding relief. Depending on what causes you to bloat, the solution can be anything from a simple fix, like reducing your sparkling water intake, to something more involved, like changing your diet. If you can't find relief after trying the fixes outlined here, we recommend you speak to your healthcare provider for assistance and to rule out more serious medical issues.